Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
the Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops,
and today I'm joined by Doctor Roderick McIntosh. He
is Clayton Stephenson, Emeritus Professor of Anthropology at Yale
University, curator of anthropology at the Peabody Museum, New
Haven, and Honorary Distinguished professor of archaeology at in
in South Africa. His interests are in Africa. And
then old world comparative prehistory, the intellectual history of
prehistoric archaeology, ethnicity and specialization, and the origin of
authority in complex societies, urbanism, geomorphology, paleoclimate, and many
other subjects, and we're going to talk about a
few of those today. So Doctor McIntosh, welcome to
the show. It's a big pleasure to everyone
and it's my pleasure to be with you.
So, um, uh, by reading your work, I got
this idea that at least for a long time,
and I'm not sure if it's still the case
nowadays in the present moment, but people in archaeology
apparently have, uh, haven't paid as much attention to.
Africa in comparison to other places, I mean, is
that still the case? And even if it's not,
why is it that something like that happened? Why
is it that people perhaps haven't paid much attention
archaeologically to Africa?
Well, I think that to answer the most immediate
question, it's less the case now, but certainly compared
to the Middle East and to Europe, uh, and
to parts of North North America and certainly Mesoamerica.
Uh, THERE, Africa is vastly underpopulated by archaeologists, um,
and there are very few funds compared to those
other areas that are devoted to, to archaeology. Um,
BUT I will say on a bigger, bigger picture,
uh, it is true that. Historically Africa has been
neglected by archaeologists and also not so true because
an aspect of African archaeology, which is paleoanthropology or
the studies of the conditions and the evidence for
the evolution of hominids that has since the 20s
and certainly since the 1950s. Uh, RECEIVED a disproportionate
amount of funding and of, of interest. I think
that's still very much the case. Those of us
who work on the later periods of African prehistory
are very envious of all the money that has
been put into, uh, human, human evolution. Um, BUT,
uh, so, so that, that, that, that is the
case that there's, there's has always been an interest
in Africa for the very earliest periods, but very
bizarrely, it almost seemed. For archaeologists with the beginning
of what would be called the Neolithic in Europe
or the later Stone Age in in Africa, it's
almost as if there was a belief, belief that
a curtain fell over Africa and all of a
sudden the people, the populations of Africa no longer
became uh innovative, they no longer, they were really
stuck in, in, in, in. A timelessness, um, and
I'll digress right now to say that that was
very much the mindset of the European archaeologists who
came into Africa during the during the colonial period.
You have to understand, of course, and this won't
be a surprise that there was a deep substratum
of racism involved in the whole colonial enterprise. Um,
I wish I could say that that's gone forever,
but it's, but it's not, um, but also there
was a. I, uh. An effort by the colonial
authorities to restrict the kinds of research by anthropologists
and archaeologists and historians that might counter the idea
that these were, um, these were primitive people being
enlightened by the colonial regimes and that's, that's, that's
still a very superficial way of answering your question
on a deeper level. There was uh In global
archaeology, as well as global history, an idea that
goes way back to the Greeks um and uh
is, is carried on through the Arab scholars and
early European scholars. That number one, that it was
more likely the case that there was only one
or at most a very few centers of innovation.
For the Greeks, this was an idea that was
called the Euc Kemeny. So there was the idea
that before Greek civilization, there was a center of
Innovation, uh, with the Sumerians, the Babylonians, and the
Assyrians, and then that passed on to a degree
to the Egyptians, but when it came to for
classical Greek, uh, Hellenic Greek, uh, civilization, that idea
of the Yuchey was brought to its, it's, its
fullest, but then that was passed on, um, to,
uh, the, um. Uh, THE basis of Arabic geography
and also from there was passed on to early,
uh, early medieval and even very early medieval, let's
say, uh, European conceptions of, of how to divide
up the world into those people who were. Innovative
and those people who weren't and interesting if you
look at Dante's Inferno, there's a whole section about
where he, he basically plots out the the movement
of the Kemeny across northern northern Italy. It could
get as finely detailed as as that, but coming
into the end of the 19th century and into
the 20th century when archaeology really gets its glo
it's where when it starts to globalize. There was
a sense that um. It was best to find
the centers of innovation. And there was a biblical
sort of push for that as well. And so
much of early archaeology, archaeology cut its teeth as
it, as it were in biblical biblical lands and
of course um um in the southern, southern Levant,
but there was, there was a sense that Early
people were so innovate and inventive, and they were
so non-receptive to new ideas from the outside that
you really only had to spend your time looking
at the innovative areas and with a sense that
later on new ideas like urbanism and the state
and technological changes like iron production and and whatnot.
It, it would eventually pass on to other areas,
other non-inventive areas, uh, but it would be a
shadow application of what what went on before. This
put Europe in a very kind of uncomfortable position
because in that early conception. Uh, MOST of Europe
was not inventive at all and would have to
wait for agriculture to come come up the Danube
for, uh, iron production to come through the Mediterranean
after being invented in in Anatolia and work. It's
way, way through. So there were early maps by
early archaeologists in the 20s and then in the,
in the 30s of uh waves of innovation spreading
out from the centers of, of, of, of, of,
of innovation. The interesting thing is that then there
was a variation on that which said that there
were other parts of the world which were supremely.
Uninventive inventive. Africa being one, Southeast Asia being being
another, so there was a, a parallel sense that
That Southeast Asia was kind of mired in primitiveness
until Hindu traders came in and brought the idea
of temples and brought the idea of, of, of,
of advanced religion and, and, and trade, of course.
Other places uh like uh the southern end of
South America and the Amazon were also thought of
as centers of, of, of, of um of, of
conservatative is. Whereas we know now that there are
enormous cities and states going on in the Amazon
that have only been found in the last really
1010 years. So this Africa was not alone, but
I think that the sense that Africa did that
archaeologists didn't need to spend a lot of time
in Africa was exasper exacerbated by the the racism
that was involved in in um. Uh, COLONIALISM as,
as well.
Yes, it's very interesting because I have always also
had this idea that when we look into anthropology
and archaeology, we have this sense that, OK, so
we've been looking into Africa up until more or
less the point where the out of Africa migration
start occurring and then suddenly we shift our focus,
particularly after the advent of the. Neolithic to the
Middle East, sometimes to China and then to Europe
as well, mostly, uh, a, a little, we look
a little bit to also places like India, but
basically, uh, and anything from North Africa up, I
guess. Egypt also a little bit. But, but then,
uh, I mean, it's interesting because there seems to
Be that gap and hopefully it's not as big
nowadays as it as it was until very recently
where when it comes to the history and prehistory
of the African continent, suddenly it seems that until
the European colonialists arrived there, not much really happened.
Happens in terms of developments in terms of urbanism
state formation and all of that, but now we
are, we know that's not really the case,
right, right. Well, let me tell you a quick
story about one of my heroes from the French
colonial period. Um, HIS name is Ramon Moni, um,
and he was a French administrator who took it
on as a private campaign. To go to archaeological
sites all around the, the French colonies, so the
Sahil and Sahara. So he spent his life documenting
cities and states and, and he did a really
very good job, but he was so immersed in
this idea that all these innovations had to come
in from North Africa. He wrote, he wrote a
book, um. Uh, SORT of a general book for
the general French French public, um, and he entitled
it translated into, into English, the, the, the, the
dark centuries of Africa where he basically said when
the, when the Arabs started to come across the
Sahara in the 9th century, they basically found people
at a uniform level of complexity or or development.
That was essentially the same as the beginning of
the Iron Age in in Europe, and they had
been that way for centuries, if not millennia. Now,
I say he's one of my heroes because once
in the 1970s we started finding early cities and
early states, the archaeological evidence. He immediately said, everything
that I've ever written about Africa is wrong. And,
and I take, I take, I take it back
all back, uh, so he was, so so it's,
it's not fair in all cases to say that
all the colonialists were, were racists, some, some were,
of course, but it's, it goes. It goes hand
in glove with, with classic racism, this cultural racism,
if you will, or, or centrism, um, that was
deep at the heart of the, the denigration of
some people and the elevation of, of other people.
So perhaps to illustrate the things we're talking about
here, let's get into a specific example because otherwise
we would have to look across the entire. African
continent and that's not possible, unfortunately. So you've done
work on the *** band, for example. What do
we know about urbanism there? I mean, there's a
common idea that up till the 14th or 15th
century urban before that period, urbanism didn't really arise
there. But is that really true?
Well, it's not true at all, but before I
talk about the The *** Bend or what I
think the middle middle ***, this larger, large area.
Let me tell the real quick story about the,
the, the, the ruins of Great Zimbabwe. So when
the English came into what was Rhodesia, they found
these magnificent ruins and was clearly urban in style
and in proportions and whatnot. But it was so
antithetical to the whole colonial enterprise to think that
local people had made this magnificent ruins that they
spent enormous amounts of time trying to find uh
Phoenician or Queen Sheba or King Solomon or someone
from the biblical past as having come down into
this gold-bearing area and created a. Uh, uh, uh,
LOCAL enterprise really irrespective of the, of the local,
local people. It was so bad that, uh, the
early colonialists dug. All of the ruins. So in
other words, once as as early as 1928 when
a legitimate archaeologist came into those ruins, there were
no deposits that had been untouched, no, no deposits
that could be excavated scientifically. KNOW that that is
complete nonsense that the local Shona people or the
ancestors of the Shona people had built Great Zimbabwe,
the city, but also the, the state that was
involved in all that, but it was deeply a
part of the colonial. Signature that local people could
not have come up with this by themselves. It
was a similar situation in the Middle ***. So
the middle ***. We call the middle ***. The
*** River comes up from tropical West Africa, flows
north, uh, up to the, the, the skirt of
the, the Sahara at Timbuktu, and then bends back
down. But before it gets to Timbuktu, it makes
this enormous floodplain. Now the floodplain now is 55,000
square kilometers. Compare that to Egypt, which is 27,000
square kilometers in Mesopamia, which is 31, so far
larger. It's an arid lands. Floodplain. So in the
classical explanation of why cities began in Sumeria or
why cities started along the Nile, you need a
river flowing through a dry area so that there
could be control of the irrigation controlled by a
king who then would have bureaucracy and have a
military presence and, and whatnot. So there is this,
this, this, this uh Formula, a recipe, if you
will, for the beginnings of of urbanism. But the
early colonialists just thought, well, this, this very fertile
floodplain in sub-Saharan Africa just had to be the
exception. It there just couldn't be indigenous urbanism. Well,
in the early, uh, well, 75 and first big
season in '77, uh we started excavating a site
called Jenny Geno, which is in the country of
Mali right now. It's in the southern part of
the middle ***, but historically it was a sister
city to Tim Timbuktu, about 400 kilometers or or
so away, and we had no idea how, how
All this mound was going to be, so it's,
it's like a tell that that's the word that's
used in Mesopotamia for an artificial mound built of
basically. Eroded mud and the garbage that city dwellers
would build, build up above a floodplain. So it
looked like a classic tail. There was millions and
millions and millions of broken pieces of pottery on
the, on the surface, but we had no reference
for dating. So we started digging, we started digging
and couldn't tell if this was an island or
if it was a digging through. Anthropogenic human-created uh
deposits, 5 m 6 m 7 m, and, and
down, uh, and when the first radiocarbon dates came,
came back 200 AD, uh, 100 100 BC, we
were blown away because if those radiocarbon dates were
correct, um, and they turned out to be correct
and if we excavated well, which I believe we
did, we did. Then it put to the lot
that put a lie to the idea that the
idea of urbanism would have penetrated across the Sahara
uh in about the 9th, the 9th century. So
this is what we call the Arab stimulation. A
hypothesis that there couldn't be urbanism and there couldn't
be states, couldn't be kings and whatnot until the
ideas of these penetrated. And I'll just mention that
the other big area of cities in sub-Saharan Africa,
which is the Swahili coast of East Africa, exactly
the same thing. There was a sense that there
couldn't be cities, couldn't be advanced trade, couldn't be
kingdoms until the Arabs came trading down the Indian
Ocean. In again the 9th century or maybe even
a little earlier. And once the, once the, I
mean, you had this silly situation one of the
early colonial archaeologists dug down a great big big
site called Kilwa, dug down until he stopped finding
Persian Gulf pottery and just stopped digging. There were
still city deposits there. There's still, I think, 44
more meters of city deposits, but he just couldn't
process that there could have been a city there
before the Arabs came, came in. So subsequently to
that work in the 70s, we've worked in a
number of places, including Timbuktu, but a number of
places. In the middle of ***, and we now,
so we do survey, so we walk over the
landscape and we look for the, the parts of
the landscape like islands or tells or or whatnot
that would be good for human habitation, good rice
growing lands near nearby, uh, good high ground for
the cattle and, and sheep and goats, uh, to
be protected during the flood, flood season. And we've
now found hundreds of these, these tells, uh, throughout
that, that great big floodplain. Hundreds, and there probably
are thousands, we just haven't surveyed the whole, the
whole area, and we're now getting dates, um, certainly
middle of the first millennium BC or 500 BC
or so, um, and in other areas. Getting dates
800 BC, 1000 BC for. The beginnings of settlements
that will become cities, whether they were right at
the very very beginning, whether we could have called
them cities or proto cities or just the sort
of the nucleus of the, of an eventual city,
but there's no question that these were independent of
any kind of influence coming either from Egypt or
from North Africa. We can tell when the trade.
With the North African starts, the Trans-Saharan trade, we
can tell when the trade from Egypt begins, but
that's well into the process, and I will say
you asked about, you asked, is it true that
it was until the 14th or 15th century that
you have, uh, urbanism. In fact, in the sequence
from Jenny Geno and most of the other sequence,
the 14th century is when a lot of these
cities decline. So they've been there for 1500 years
doing just fine, and the population either reestablished itself
in a different pattern over the landscape or population
declines, but you know what's happening in Europe in
the 14th century with all the with the black
plague and whatnot, so we, we don't know the
plague. Uh, WAS the case. We know that there
was plague in North Africa in the at least
in the in the 13th century, um, and how
many fleas does it take on a camel crossing
the Sahara for, for, for Black Plague to come
into a virgin reservoir or population like Sub-Saharan Africa
would have, would have been.
And again you mentioned there, uh, North African I
uh I have already mentioned it earlier because as
I said we have this idea that anything that
uh anything relevant that happened in Africa until just
a few centuries ago happened in North Africa and
places like West Africa, sub-Saharan Africa, were for the
most part. Stagnant culturally, technologically, etc. But, uh, is
that really the case? Is that the, is it
the case that, uh, West Africa and sub-Saharan Africa,
uh, I mean, the reason why they were able
to move from a stone age societies into Iron
Age societies was due to interventions from North Africa.
Well, it's, uh, I, I would say definitely not,
um, and with the caveat that so little bit,
so little archaeology relative to the vast areas that
we're talking about, um, so when we talk about
West Africa, sub-Saharan, West Africa, you could probably fit
5 Europes into, into that area. Um, YOU certainly
could fit. One entire North America into, into that,
that area. So again, this is an this is
a vast geographical subregion that's underpopulated by by archaeologists.
So when So if If the stimulus, and not
the cause, but one of the stimuli to the
beginnings of states and cities is trade, long distance
trade, trade in exotics and whatnot, we have very
firm evidence for trade in. Uh, uh, IN exotics,
uh, east-west across West Africa long before the beginnings
of of any physical evidence portrayed north, north south
across the area to North Africa. The issue of
iron. Production has always been a Let's say a
curious one, and it's one that's highly debated right
right now, um, but we've got, so, so basically
iron, iron is invented in Anatolia in 1600 BC.
It spreads fairly rapidly into the eastern Mediterranean and
certainly by 900 or so. It's in places like
Carthage and Utica in North Africa, largely because of
the trading. Activities of, of, of, of uh uh
the the Phoenicians. So, so clearly the Iron Age
is in place and there are local people making
iron by 900. No real evidence before that for
North Africa. So now along the Senegal River, we
for the last, uh, well, last 12 years but
more intensively looking at iron, uh for the last
5 years have been working on ironworking sites. Uh,
IT'S a. It's a completely different iron technology. So
they're basically in the ancient world there are 22
iron technologies. There was the, the Anatolian iron technology
that spreads into Europe and into the me and
then there was the Chinese, basically wrought wrought iron
and cast cast iron. This is a completely, the,
the furnaces are completely different. Um, THEY'RE not recorded
anywhere else in, in, in the world, and we're
starting to get these dates. Uh, CERTAINLY. FOR the
iron furnaces and the blowpipes and certainly the iron,
uh, certainly by 500 and there's earlier deposits with
some iron and some slag, so we don't have
the furnaces going back to 1000. So if there's
no iron in North Africa before 900. And these
furnaces are dating to 1000 with a completely different
technology. It implies. That you have a third center
of Creation of iron iron technology. Now there are
a lot of archaeo. Metallurgists who don't like that
idea at all, and they, and so we'll keep
digging until we find or we don't find the
the the furnaces, but right now, um, I have
to say that the The Senegalese are delighted with
the with the suggestion that uh that they were
West Africans um independently invented iron. Technologically there are
some issues with it, but we're just at the
very beginning of, of developing this, this story. So,
so I think to get back to your bigger,
bigger issue is. The more archaeology we do. The
more We underscore the point that West Africans were
not conservative culturally. They were not non-inventive. They were,
they were innovating within their own their own environment,
um.
Uh, SO earlier I've also mentioned the fact that
we focus a lot on out of Africa migrations,
particularly the spread of Homo sapiens across Eurasia and
also other species of the homo genus. Um, BUT
what about Africa? Do we know much about the
migrations and dispersals across the continent, particularly of Homo
sapiens?
Right, uh, well, yes, but we wish we knew
more. So, uh, let me, let me put it
this way, we now for 3. Uh, SOMEWHAT recent
migrations. I'll talk about those in, in, in, in
a moment and then I'll get to earlier, uh,
the, the, the question of, of multiple Homo sapiens
origins within Africa itself. So, so, so we were
talking about North Africa and there's a very good
archaeological but also ancient DNA evidence right now. That
there was a big infusion of Eurasian populations, uh,
whether coming in from Europe down to the south,
um, and it does seem that Gibraltar, before the,
the sea level. The lower sea level of the
last glacial period before it came up to modern,
uh, levels that there was a quite easy passage
across the Straits of Gibraltar. So that would put
it at 10,000 or or or or so. Lots
of cultural contact and migrations from Eurasia back to,
back to Africa. So this is the back to
Africa. Uh, uh, HYPOTHESIS, um, maybe as early as
15, 15,000, um, but in a way, the migration
is Almost irrelevant because there's plenty of cultural contact.
So people are making stone tools and people are,
are, are trading in animals, um, uh, not, not
across the Mediterranean but around the Mediterranean. There's very
little evidence, um, with one exception, very little evidence
that any of that penetrated this across the Sahara.
So during the, the greenest part of the, the
green Sahara, which would have been about 8000 to
let's say 66,000, there was, there were big African
populations in the middle of the Sahara. And some
of that we see in the ancient DNA some
of that penetrating into North Africa where it's mixing
with this already mixed population, but at, at the
end of the that green period, there's a, the
Sara really is a barrier. The Horn of Africa,
so going into Ethiopia and whatnot, there seems to
be a bit more. Of the Eurasian maybe coming
through the the across the Red Sea and and
whatnot to about 6, 6000 or so, but really
ending in the southern part of, of, of Ethiopia.
So, so you, you have the back to Africa
and that's basically North Africa. That population in Ethiopia,
kind of northern Kenya. Develops a uh a pastoral
way of life, uh, called pastoral Neolithic, very clever,
clever term, and once that way of life kind
of coalesces, there's a population explosion and a fast
movement down the spine of East East Africa. Getting
almost into Malawi and the sort of the northern
part of Southern Africa. So that's a very rapid
movement of pastoralists. I've got a South African student
right now working in KwaZulu-Natal, uh, and she believes
that she's got. The first evidence for South Africa
itself for pastoralists before, pastorist before iron, pastorist before
the the classic Bantu expansion, um, and then the
Bantu expansion is the is the last of the
the more recent ones. So coming out of what's
now sort of the Cameroon. And eastern Nigeria that
seems to be the place for another coalescence of,
of a of a agricultural way of life, um,
with a characteristic language, which is the Bantu language.
Most people in sub-Saharan Africa right now speak Bantu
Bantu languages, um. And a little bit later, so
this is about, let's say 5, 5000 BC, that's
happening. By about 3000 BC, there's a rapid movement
again down the into the Congo Basin. And, and
another wave if you will, in, in Eastern Africa.
And they sort of get down into Southern Africa
a little bit later than the pastoralists, but all
of the The groups like the, the, um, Sotho
and the and the and the the the Zulu
and whatnot or speak up basically uh a Bantu
language, um, as part of the end of the
terminus of of that movement. So those Recent migrations
are well documented by archaeology and the ancient DNA.
Uh, AT this point there are only 10 published
studies of ancient DNA in, in sub-Saharan Africa. One
of the problems is that it's, it's a hot
climate, and the ancient DNA does, does not preserve
as, as well, but the ancient DNA seems to
be backing up the, the, the the archaeology. Before
that, uh, we look at the hunter hunters and
gatherers, uh, and there's a little bit of ancient
DNA for the hunters and gatherers as well. And
right now the, there's a conflict between the archaeologists
and the, the geneticists, and the geneticists are saying
that basically they were stratified populations. Latitudinally going, going
north, where the hundreds and gatherers down in the
south had relatively little contact. With the, the hunters
and gatherers in the Congo Basin, hunters and gatherers
in, in East Africa and certainly the hunters and
gatherers in, in West West Africa, uh, which It
is strange because in places like Europe where we
have a good ancient DNA record, people are exchanging
genetic material all the time. I mean, we're, they
were humans like us in the same way that
we're exchanging genetic material all the time. They were,
so is, is that conclusion from the ancient DNA
just because of the poor sample, or is that
really what's going on? And the archaeology. EMPHATICALLY says
that's not what's going on, that people were that,
I mean, we're, we're talking about tools, that tools
are the ideas of tools are moving long, long
distances, whether by actual migration of people or the
ideas or, or there may be multiple inventions of
the same, same tools and we know that. That
does, that does happen. But, but right now there's,
there's this interesting intellectual contest between the geneticists and
the, and the archaeologists on justice, on justice issue.
So Interview me again in 30 years and and
they made a resolution.
Well, it would be a great pleasure to have
you back on the show in 30 years to
to try to have maybe, maybe, maybe 20. 00,
OK, OK. Well,
let's agree with 20 years then. Oh
OK.
So, uh, uh, I would like to ask you
now a more general question. So we've been discussing
here how some of the prehistory, particularly of Africa,
has been neglected in archaeology and anthropology more generally.
What would you say that the study of Africa
and African populations can add to anthropology and archaeology
and particularly to perhaps better understanding of human evolution
and the evolution of human behavior.
OK, well, uh, uh, could I talk about the
end complex society first and then I'll get to
the, the human behavior. So it is right now
it's there's a very interesting conversation going on between
archaeologists in China and archaeologists working in Africa on
the beginnings of cities and states. So these are
classic complex when we say complex societies, we need
a population that's not just large, but is stratified
horizontally, vertically. There's usually some kind of power relations
or whatnot. But the classic model for the beginnings
of urbanism that I talked about before, um, really
excluded a lot of sites. In China, early sites
in China. So we get early cities, massive great
big cities in places like Shandong Province, uh, that
Right now don't have any evidence for kings. They
don't have any. They don't have a lot of
evidence for inequality, um, so it's clear they're, they're
clearly they're specialists. They're, they're places where different potters
are making different kinds of pots. They're big places.
This is, this is before iron, so this is
where different workshops for different kinds of stone tools
and, and, and whatnot. Big pot. Population if the
whole area was occupied at the at the at
the at the same time, but our older model
coming out of Sumeria and Babylonia was you had
to have a king. You had to have someone
in control. You had to have despotism to keep
the The underlings in, in their, in their position.
What we have in so many parts of, of
sub-Saharan Africa, and I go back to, I talked
about the, the sites of Timbuktu and particularly Jennyino.
I've been digging at Jennyino for 28 years. I've
put a lot of holes in that big site
and a lot of other sites. I have yet
to find a king. I joke with my classes
that if I put one more. Unit one more
big unit into Jenny General and I come down
on the king. I'll have to burn all my
books and, and commit suicide in a pyre of
all my articles because I've been writing, writing so
much about, can there be urbanism without, without kings?
Can there be, can there be complex society. Without
inequality because we really don't have any evidence for
massive inequality, the kind of predicted inequality that you,
you'd get from, uh, from Mesopotamia, from the older
way of looking at, at, at Mesopotamia. So inequality,
despotism, all these essentials for urbanism just don't. Exist
in the middle *** the same way that they
don't exist at these sites in China and now
we're getting a complete Completely different. A vision of
what was going on, particularly at the beginnings of
the Indus civilization in In, uh, Pakistan and, and
in India. These, these sites classically have no citadel.
They have no power, power structure and the early
British colonialists who were digging those sites that, well,
they're there, but we just haven't found them yet.
But at a certain point, uh, it becomes a
sampling exercise. At a certain point, you say, we've
dug enough if If there, there, if there are
these classic manifestations of despotism and inequality, we should
have found something. So it means that we have
to look in a, in a, in a different,
different way for the beginnings, for the circumstances under
which people elect to come together with their different
specialties, their different belief systems, their different sense of
identity. And yet there must be a different way
to find peaceful coop cooperation. So that's on the
later period. So the, the, the, the archaeology and
the paleoanthropology of the beginning of modern modernism as
not modern behavior the last I'd say 15 years,
but certainly. 55 years. And it's because of the
fines in a number of parts of Africa. Um,
MOST of the work is, most of the work
is done in East, East Africa, of course, but
the really innovative work is coming out of South
Africa. And, and here's the frustration, uh, Ricardo, the,
this is a period when the sea level is
going up and down. And so the caves that
are providing this wonderful information are now right on,
right at the, the, the present sea level, uh,
which is high level. So there are, it is
unimaginable that there aren't thousands of other caves below
sea level with even better information about this critical.
About this critical period. So the critical period is
probably as early as 500,000 years ago. Really critical,
the pinnacle of critical, criticality comes at about 300,
15 or so, um, and then And then the
issues I'll be talking about sort of develop continuously
to about uh let's say just arbitrarily 125,000. So
what we're looking for is the coincidence of modern
morphological humans. So big brain, grassile face, teeth, uh,
adapted to a omnivorous diet, and that, and that
trend has been going on long, long before, uh.
Uh, AND, and of course, uh. Uh, OTHER anatomical
issues that we see in, in modern, modern humans
coincidence with, uh, a stone tool making technology, uh,
that is, is known. It's the middle Paleolithic. It's
the classic, um, level, uh, tech tech technique, um,
but it's, it's quite different than what went on
before. Before they were using the cores. Um, THIS
is, this is, they're spending a lot of time
with a lot of knowledge of the physics of
the stone tool to make, uh, to make a
tool to make a flake or a blade. Specific
to different tasks, so if you think of. An
auto mechanics shop before about 500,000 years ago, that
shop would have had, you know, a really sophisticated
shop would have had 20 tools. At 500,000, it
goes to 200. Uh, TOOLS. By 315, all of
a sudden you get anatomically modern people and the
toolkit expands, doubles, doubles again. Um, AND it's a
little bit later that you start again down in
South South Africa to start to see. The first
evidence that we, um, and archaeologists tend to be
conservative in their assignation of something like symbolism, the
first evidence symbolism. So the very first evidence that
comes in quite a bit earlier than 300,000 or
uh necklaces of shells, shell necklaces, um, but then
you start to get. Scratchings on ochre use of
ochre, uh, to make not drawings, not like the
classic Paleolithic drawings in the caves of France and,
and, and Spain and Portugal, I might, I might
add, but, uh, uh, but there is the very
beginning. So at the same time in Eurasia. There
are hominids and there are. Local changes to hominid
evolution. So of course, the biggest one being Neanderthal
coming out of, out of, out of uh late
Erectus. Eectus comes in. 18 Neanderthal, you know, shows
up, let's say 600,000 or or or so, um,
that didn't happen in Africa and, and, and there
is, there is somewhat of a debate. As to
whether Neanderthal was responsible for some of the cave
art, um, I'm agnostic, you know, I'm an Africanist.
I'm not going to get involved in, in, in
little, little bickers, you know, provincial bickers like, like,
like that, um, and there are, there are local
changes to post. Uh, ERECTUS hominids in Asia itself.
But these coincident changes in the complex thinking, if
symbolism is evidence of complex thinking and anatomically modern.
Humanity That's all Africa. Now, is it only South
Africa? Or do we just have these spectacular caves,
uh, by chance in, in, in South Africa? Is
this happening in East Africa as well? Probably so,
and, and, and the evidence is coming out of,
uh, for that as well. The first anatomically modern
human is coming from Morocco at, at 3000. So
first anatomically modeled a site called Jaba Haroun 33,300.
Uh, 15,000, 15,000. I don't know that there's much
material culture associated with those, those, I, I think
I would have read if there was, was, was,
was much that doesn't, of course, archaeologists can't argue
from negative evidence, so it doesn't mean that there
wouldn't be, uh, it's just that they haven't found
it yet, but that association of Symbolism with anatomically
modern humans comes in from South Africa. Big question
is how much contact is going across the the
continent at this point. And one of the big
issues there is that you have the Congo Basin.
Which is basically a, a great big alluvial bowl.
So any fossil-bearing strata rocks would be covered by
meters and meters, frankly, of, of sediment brought in
by the Congo, Congo River. And basically it's the
same in West Africa as well. Uh, SO where
I work, the first rocks. There are 280 m
below the, below the surface. There could be plenty
of very early evidence of hominid evolution there, but
we'll, I mean, I won't say we, we will
never know, but given present technology, but it is
true that the very first hominid in the whole
world. Is in Chad in West in West Africa
at 7 million, um, so, so it gives, gives
us the, the hope that that we will one
day have enough coverage, archaeological coverage of the whole
continent that we can answer the kinds of questions
that that you, you presently are are asking, um,
so I, I, you know, I, I would. It's
a coward's stance to say we don't know because
we don't have, you know, that is the case
in in for many of these, many of these
questions.
Right, so I would like to get into one
last topic of our conversation today. So, uh, in
what ways can anthropology contribute to the study of
climate change?
OK. Well, uh, so the way climate change is
one of the things that I do both from
the climatology, from the physics point of point of
view and also from the human response. So, so
essentially when you talk about climate change. If just
looking at the objective climate change, the physics of
climate change, climate is always changing. It's changing at
different, different scales, and we've come a long way
to understanding the rhythms of those scales. So, and
we call them forcing, forcing mechanisms, um, and they're.
They're increasingly predictable. So in other words, we know
what's going to happen at a scale of 100
years because of the eccentricity of the Earth's orbit
around the, around the sun. Um, THERE'S nothing we
can do about it, but, but we, we can
pretty well predict in 70,000 years what that, what,
what the effect of the sun's distance. On the
earth will, will be numbers of watts hitting 1
m 1 m square. The, the The second aspect
of climate change is, are we doing something to
the landscape now that's interfering with those. Those patterns
and obviously everyone is aware of the increase, the
really frightening increase of of parts per million of
carbon dioxide, parts per billion of, of, of methane.
Um, THERE may be some disagreement, um, less. And
less disagreement among scientists about what's responsible for those
unprecedented, um, increases in the greenhouse, greenhouse gasses, uh,
but we, we do know increasingly, very accurately where
those greenhouse gasses would be without human inter interference.
And so, so that's, that's the, that's. That's the
physics and the anthropology comes together with is it.
Increasing the acreage of rice fields in Southeast Asia,
that is increasing the parts per million of carbon
dioxide. Is it the deforestation of a certain amount
of the, of the, of the, uh, uh, of
the Amazon? What happens? With what's, what's the, uh,
we, we have the mechanisms to understand that part
of, of, but those are human actions. So that's
where the anthropology comes in. The other, the other
part of the anthropology is. Uh What are the
effects of not just the, the known climate cycles,
but the perturbations to those cycles created by climate,
climate change, um, that's sociology, it's a bit of
history, it's why, why is such a large part
of the earth's population inhabiting the, the, near the
oceans. So that an increase by 20 centimeters or
a meter uh would would disproportionately affect the human,
human populations. So, so. We, we, that those, that's
the large scale on the, on the. AND getting
back to Africa on the. MORE finely grained scale.
We can project. Uh, WHAT might, what might the
effects of, uh, let's say. Uh, uh, 0.5 centimeter
uh centigrade, uh, increase in temperature due to the
southern bo boundary of the Sahara and to the
populations at at the Sahara. We see that happening
now. Um, THE ill effects, is it really is
it just climate change or is it this very
complex mix of Of human policy. And climate change.
So just on, on that, the 1950s were a
time of anomalously good rain. Human population in the
healing states rose, but also the cattle population rose,
and cattle were being raised, herded into parts of
the Sahara where they normally had not been before.
The Great Sahil drought hits 1968 through 1985. If
indeed it's ever, ever ended, that's, that's debatable, um,
and that's, that was the cause of enormous human
misery. You take those facts together and now there's
a policy, um, Uh, initiative, uh, by the Sahelian
states called the Greenbelt, and the idea is to
plant trees. 500 kilometers. Of 500 kilometers of tree
planting north south over 4 uh 450 kilometers east,
east west, uh, and then, and as you can
imagine, that's very controversial because some countries don't have
control over. Those parts of the, the, how can
they get in the, the, the tree planting, um,
how can you, uh, how can you convince local
populations whom you would need to protect those trees
if there's a basic need for firewood and they,
you just can't cook if you don't have the
firewood and here, here are these we, we in
the French colonies, there's uh uh uh. PHENOMENON called
the fore, uh, uh, class A, uh, it's protected
forests basically, it's an enormous failure because they didn't
enlist the The local, they eliminated the local population,
um, and so all of a sudden became a
uh us them a hostile situation. So anthropology and
to a degree archaeology can combine with the physics
to understand what are the what are the consequences
of these different aspects of what we call climate
change.
Uh, AND so, um, related to that, my last
question will be, so can studying African paleo climate
help us tackle, not just understand but tackle climate
change issues.
Well, I think so because uh uh The physics
of weather and climate at Let's, let's call the
middle, middle scale are fairly well known. So in
Europe, climate is largely controlled by the jet stream.
Uh, Africa and many parts of the tropic are
monsoonal. We understand the mechanisms, we understand the causes
of, of the, of the, the mon monsoon. We,
we increasingly understand the, the mechanisms of, of the,
of the mon monsoon. It's what becomes interesting. Is
that 51% of the African continent, sub-Saharan African subcontinent,
burns every year. There's an enormous load of particulates
in the atmosphere, and those particulates either creating a
germ around which raindrops can, can form or something
that or, or in, in a certain density preventing
rain from, from falling. So we have an archaeological
record going back, let's say a million. Uh, OF
purposeful burning, human control of burning, control of burning.
That record becomes better, as you might imagine, as
we come closer in time, but also we, we
understand more the effects of burning widespread landscape modification.
Killing off of vast amounts of, of uh forest
or gallery forests along, um, we, we understand that
better better as pastoralism comes in, agricultural, agriculture comes
in. So we have, if you will, a field
laboratory from archaeology. Of how human-based landscape modification interacts
with the physics of the The jet stream, the
different jet streams, um, and also the, the monsoonal,
monsoonal system. So I would say we're at the
We're at the very beginning of putting all these
together, so much effort and quite rightly has been
put into the basic physics of understanding climate patterns
forcing me, but increasingly, uh, we're finding conferences and
papers and books and what and whatnot about the,
the human climate system interaction.
OK, great. So, Doctor McIntosh, just before we go,
would you like to tell people where they can
fund the internet? Are there any good places for
that?
Well, uh, there's, uh, the, the Yale University, um,
website for the anthropology department, but also I'm a
part of the, uh, council on archaeological studies. Uh,
THERE'S, there's a website, it's, it's, it's being revised
right now, so maybe give it a couple, couple
of weeks, but that's, that would be the case,
um, and, um, I've Both in French and in
English, I've made a real effort to try to
write. Articles and and also books for the general,
general public, um, and so if you go into
my page on the anthropology department uh And But
It's a list the web page, but um it's,
it's, it's an incredibly exciting time in African archaeology
right now. It's, it's, it's an incredibly exciting time
in African archaeology right now. And one of the
things that has excited me the most is the
interest of the general public. In Mali, um, and
I'll just mention that, that, uh, my Co-director at
Jeni General became the first democratically elected president of
Mali. So Malians are very immersed in their own
history and, and archaeology, and there are now 250
archaeology students, undergraduate students at the Department of History
at the University of Senegal, the, the University of
the, the Dakar Dakar University. So we're trying to
get the excitement but also the, the new information
about Africa out to Africans uh in that, in
that way.
Great, so Doctor McIntosh, thank you so much again
for taking the time to come on the show
and it's been a pleasure to talk to you.
And it's been my pleasure. Thank you, Ricardo.
Hi, guys. Thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please do not
forget to like it, share, comment, and subscribe. And
if you like more generally what I'm doing, please
consider supporting. The show on Patreon or PayPal. You,
you have all of the links in the description
of this interview. This show is brought to you
by Nights Learning and Development done differently. Check their
website at Nights.com. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
PayPal supporters Perera Larsson, Jerry Muller, Ens Frederick Sunder,
Bernard Seyi, Olaf Alec, Shannaan Wiser, Adam Cassel, Matthew
Whitting Whitting B Arna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika Leni,
John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly, Robert Windegger, Ruinnai Zup,
Mark Nevis, Colin Holbrook, Simon Columbus, Phil Cavanagh, Michael
Stormer, Samuel Andreev. Alexander Danbauer Fergalasen Hal Herzognal Jonathan
Librant John Narst and Samuel Corea, Eric Heinz, Mark
Smith, Jean Velard's France, David Sloan Wilson, dear Roman
Roch Diegoundo, Yannick Punter Usmani, Charlotte Blizzo Barbarwaamh Polotaevskynale
Way Madison, Gary G. Hellman. Some of Zal Adriane
Nick Golden Paul Tolentin, Jean Barba, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Frank A Bortollotti, Gabriel
Pansortesus Lelitsky, Scott, Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy. Sonny Smith,
John Wiman, Martin Ackland, Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Giorjaneau, Luke Lovai, Georgio Steaus, Chris Williamson, Peter Owen,
David Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez. Chevalier bungalow atheists, Larry De Lee
Junior, Holt Eric Sterry, Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert
Gray Toro, DRPMD, Igor N, Jeff McMann, Jake Zul,
Barnabas rads, Mark Campbell, Richard Bowen. Thomas Dobner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Story, Manuel Oliveira, Kimberly Johnson, and Benjamin
Gelbert. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stefinnik, Tom Venningam, Bernard Jugni,
Curtis Dickson. Benedict Mueller, Vega Gidley, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Jean Giancarlo Montenegro, Robert Louis and
Alie Cortiz, and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender,
Sajiquarian, and Bogdan Kanivets. Thank you for all.